ālokya śailoddharaṇādirūpaṃ prabhāvamuccaistava gopalokā: |
viśveśvaraṃ tvāmabhimatya viśve nandaṃ bhavajjātakamanvapṛcchan ||1||
ālokya	seeing
śaila-uddharaṇa-	the lifting of the mountain
ādi-rūpaṃ	and other feats (of Thee)
prabhāvam-uccai:-	the great powers
tava	of Thee
gopa-lokā:	the cowherds,
viśveśvaraṃ	the Lord of the Universe
tvām-abhimatya	Thee considering
viśve nandaṃ	all of them to Nanda
bhavat-jātakam-	Thy horoscope
anvapṛcchan	asked again and again
The Gopaalakas witnessed Thy tremendous feats such as the lifting of the mountain and Thy great powers. They considered Thee to be the Lord of the Universe. All of them asked Nanda again and again about Thy horoscope.
gargodito nirgadito nijāya vargāya tātena tava prabhāva: |
pūrvādhikastvayyanurāga eṣāmaidhiṣṭa tāvat bahumānabhāra: ||2||
garga-udita:	as Garg Muni had said
nirgadita:	was told
nijāya vargāya	for his own clansmen
tātena tava prabhāva:	by Thy father, Thy greatness
pūrvādhika:	more than before
tvayi-anurāga	in Thee love
eṣām-aidhiṣṭa	for these (people) increased
tāvat bahumānabhāra:	thereafter, also great respect
Thy father told his clansmen of what sage Garg had prophesied about Thy greatness. Thence forward their love and also great respect for Thee increased much more than before.
tato'vamānoditatattvabodha: surādhirāja: saha divyagavyā|
upetya tuṣṭāva sa naṣṭagarva: spṛṣṭvā padābjaṃ maṇimaulinā te ||3||
tata:-avamāna-udita-	then by disgrace caused
tattva-bodha:	truth realising
surādhirāja:	the lord of the gods, Indra
saha divya-gavyā	with the celestial cow (Kaamadhenu)
upetya tuṣṭāva	coming (to Thee) praised
sa naṣṭagarva:	he whose pride was shattered
spṛṣṭvā padābjaṃ	touching Thy lotus feet
maṇimaulinā	(by his) bejewelled crown
te	Thy (feet)
Then as a result of being disgraced his pride was shattered and the lord of the gods, Indra realised the truth about Thee. He came to Thee with the divine cow Kaamadhenu, and sang Thy praises. He touched Thy lotus feet with his bejewelled crowned head.
snehasnutaistvāṃ surabhi: payobhirgovindanāmāṅkitamabhyaṣiñcat |
airāvatopāhṛtadivyagaṅgāpāthobhirindro'pi ca jātaharṣa: ||4||
sneha-snutai:-	with love overflowing (as milk)
tvāṃ surabhi: payobhi:-	Thee, Surabhi (Kaamadhenu) with milk
govinda-nāma-	(Thee) with the name Govind
aṅkitam-abhyaṣiñcat	marked and anointed
airāvata-upāhṛta-	(and) by Airaavata brought
divya-gaṅgā-	with the celestial Ganges
pāthobhi:-indra:-api	waters Indra also
ca (abhiṣiñcat)	and (anointed) (Thee)
jāta-harṣa:	delightfully
The divine cow Kaamadhenu anointed Thee with her milk overflowing with love for Thee and so Thou were named 'Govinda', the Lord of cows. Airaavata the elephant of Indra brought the waters of the celestial Ganges and Indra also anointed Thee with it delightfully.
jagattrayeśe tvayi gokuleśe tathā'bhiṣikte sati gopavāṭa: |
nāke'pi vaikuṇṭhapade'pyalabhyāṃ śriyaṃ prapede bhavata: prabhāvāt ||5||
jagattraya-īśe	O Lord of the three Worlds
tvayi gokuleśe	(when) Thou as the Lord of Gokula
tathā-abhiṣikte sati	thus were anointed
gopavāṭa:	Gokula,
nāke-api	in heaven also
vaikuṇṭhapade-api-	in Vaikuntha also
alabhyāṃ śriyaṃ	unattainable, (such) prosperity
prapede bhavata: prabhāvāt	attained by Thy grace
O Lord of the three worlds! Thou were anointed as the Lord of Gokula. By Thy grace and glory, Gokula attained a prosperity unknown and unheard of in either the heavens or even in Vaikuntha.
kadācidantaryamunaṃ prabhāte snāyan pitā vāruṇapūruṣeṇa |
nītastamānetumagā: purīṃ tvaṃ tāṃ vāruṇīṃ kāraṇamartyarūpa: ||6||
kadācit-	once
antar-yamunaṃ	in the river Yamunaa
prabhāte snāyan pitā	very early in the morning bathing, (Thy) father
vāruṇa-pūruṣeṇa	by Varuna's emissary
nīta:-tam-ānetum-	was taken away, him to bring back
agā: purīṃ	(Thou) went to the city
tvaṃ tāṃ vāruṇīṃ	Thou ,of Varuna
kāraṇa-martya-rūpa:	(to fulfill the) purpose of human form
Once very early in the morning, Thy father was bathing in the river Yamunaa. He was taken away by the emissary of Varuna. To bring him back and also to fulfill the purpose of Thy taking human form, Thou went to the city of Varuna .
sasambhramaṃ tena jalādhipena prapūjitastvaṃ pratigṛhya tātam |
upāgatastatkṣaṇamātmagehaṃ pitā'vadattaccaritaṃ nijebhya: ||7||
sasambhramaṃ	with great surprise
tena jalādhipena	by him, the Lord of the waters
prapūjita:-tvaṃ	was well worshipped Thou
pratigṛhya tātam	taking (Thy) father
upāgata:-	returned
tat-kṣaṇam-	at once
ātma-gehaṃ	to Thy own house
pitā-avadat-	father said
tat-caritaṃ	that incident
nijebhya:	to his clansmen
The Lord of the waters, Varuna, was taken by surprise at Thy unexpected appearance. Thou were well worshipped by him. Thou immediately returned home with Thy father. Thy father, Nanda, later narrated this incident to his clansmen.
hariṃ viniścitya bhavantametān bhavatpadālokanabaddhatṛṣṇān ||
nirīkṣya viṣṇo paramaṃ padaṃ taddurāpamanyaistvamadīdṛśastān ||8||
hariṃ viniścitya	as Hari knowing with certainty
bhavantam-etān	Thee, to them
bhavat-pada-ālokana-	Thy state (of bliss) to see
baddha-tṛṣṇān	tied by (such a) thirst
nirīkṣya viṣṇo	seeing, O All pervading Lord!
paramaṃ padaṃ tat-	supreme state that
durāpam-anyai:-	not easily attainable by others
tvam-adīdṛśa:-tān	Thou showed to them
The Gopas were convinced that Thou were definitely Hari Himself. O All pervading Lord! They were tied with the intense thirst of having a direct experience of Thy Supreme State. Thou showed them that state which is not attainable to men without devotion.
sphuratparānandarasapravāhaprapūrṇakaivalyamahāpayodhau |
ciraṃ nimagnā: khalu gopasaṅghāstvayaiva bhūman punaruddhṛtāste ||9||
sphurat-	shining
parānandarasa-	(with) supreme bliss nectar
pravāha-prapūrṇa-	flow, full of it
kaivalya-mahāpayodhau	(in the) liberation's great ocean
ciraṃ nimagnā:	for long immersed
khalu gopasaṅghā:-	indeed the Gopas
tvayā-eva bhūman	by Thee only, O Infinite One!
puna:-uddhṛtā:-te	again were taken out, they
The great ocean of liberation was full and overflowing and lustrous with the supreme blissful nectar. The groups of Gopas were indeed immersed in it for long. O Infinite One! By Thee alone they were drawn back to their worldly state of consciousness.
karabadaravadevaṃ deva kutrāvatāre
nijapadamanavāpyaṃ darśitaṃ bhaktibhājām |
tadiha paśuparūpī tvaṃ hi sākṣāt parātmā
pavanapuranivāsin pāhi māmāmayebhya: ||10||
kara-badara-vat-evaṃ	in hand a berry like thus
deva kutra-avatāre	O Lord! In which incarnation
nija-padam-anavāpyam	Thy own abode (which is) unattainable
darśitaṃ bhaktibhājām	is shown to the devotees
tat-iha paśuparūpī	so here, in the cowherd form
tvaṃ hi sākṣāt	Thou indeed, in reality are
parātmā	Supreme Lord!
pavanapuranivāsin	O Dweller of Guruvaayura!
pāhi mām-	save me
āmayebhya:	from ailments
O Lord! Thy unattainable abode was revealed to the devotees with such ease and clearly as a berry in one's palm. In which other incarnation of Thee has such a thing happened? So, it is certain that here in the form of a cowherd, Thou are the Supreme Self. O Dweller of Guruvaayur! save me from ailments.